<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title/>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3>CHAPTER III.</h3>
				<p>LOCALITY AND CHRONOLOGY OF THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="subchapter-57" epub:type="subchapter">
				<header>
					<p>§ 57</p>
					<p>DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE SYNOPTICAL WRITERS AND JOHN, AS TO THE CUSTOMARY SCENE OF THE MINISTRY OF JESUS.</p>
				</header>
				<p>According to the synoptical writers, Jesus, born indeed at Bethlehem in Judea, but brought up at Nazareth in Galilee, only absented himself from Galilee during the short interval between his baptism and the imprisonment of the Baptist; immediately after which, he returned thither and began his ministry, teaching, healing, calling disciples, so as to traverse all Galilee; using as the centre of his agency, his previous dwelling-place, Nazareth, alternately with Capernaum, on the north-west border of the lake of Tiberias (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%204:12-25&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5645364642370883901" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 4:12-25">Matt iv. 12–25</a> parall.). Mark and Luke have many particulars concerning this ministry in Galilee which are not found in Matthew, and those which they have in common with him are arranged in a different order; but as they all agree in the geographical circuit which they assign to Jesus, the account of the first Evangelist may serve as the basis of our criticism. According to him the incidents narrated took place in Galilee, and partly in Capernaum down to <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%208:18&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4650588493287501737" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 8:18">viii. 18</a>, where Jesus crosses the Galilean sea, but is scarcely landed on the east side when he returns to Capernaum. Here follows a series of scenes connected by short transitions, such as <span class="trans" title="paragōn ekeithen"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">παράγων ἐκεῖθεν</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%209:9&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2969661598828099871" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 9:9">ix. 9</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%209:27&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5902979993486165839" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 9:27">27</a>), <i>passing from thence</i>, <span class="trans" title="tote"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">τότε</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%209:14&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5972824955387327230" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 9:14">v. 14</a>), <i>then</i>, <span class="trans" title="tauta autou lalountos"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ταῦτα αὐτοῦ λαλοῦντος</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%209:18&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2744820173569049883" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 9:18">v. 18</a>), <i>while he spake these things</i>; expressions which can imply no important change of place, that is, of one province for another, which it is the habit of the writer to mark much more carefully. The passage, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%209:35&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8827912526697485689" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 9:35">ix. 35</a>, <span class="trans" title="periēgen ho Iēsous tas poleis pasas—didaskōn en tais synagōgais autōn"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">περιῆγεν ὁ Ἰησοῦς τὰς πόλεις πάσας—διδάσκων ἐν ταῖς συναγωγαῖς αὐτῶν</span></span>, is evidently only a repetition of <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%204:23&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2181678582509905763" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 4:23">iv. 23</a>, and is therefore to be understood merely of excursions in Galilee. The message of the Baptist (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2011&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3328698761005058312" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew, chapter 11">chap. xi.</a>) is also received by Jesus in Galilee, at least such appears to be the opinion of the narrator, from his placing in immediate connexion the complaints of Jesus against the Galilean cities. When delivering the parable in <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2013&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4132092431118577062" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew, chapter 13">chap. xiii.</a> Jesus is by the sea, doubtless that of Galilee, and, as there is mention of his <i>house</i>, <span class="trans" title="oikia"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">οἰκία</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2013:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7603187251756778931" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 13:1">v. 1</a>), probably in the vicinity of Capernaum. Next, after having visited his native city Nazareth (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2013:53&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4151597627405856455" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 13:53">xiii. 53</a>) he passes over the sea (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2014:13&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1038105368923137648" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 14:13">xiv. 13</a>), according to Luke <span class="corr" id="xd30e14830" title="Not in source">(</span><a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%209:10&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5585604357959268404" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 9:10">ix. 10</a>), into the country of Bethsaida (Julias); whence, however, after the miracle of the loaves, he speedily returns to the western border (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2014:34&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3342723584909465000" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 14:34">xiv. 34</a>). Jesus then proceeds to the northern extremity of Palestine, on the frontiers of Phœnicia (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2015:21&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-9115296830098740475" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 15:21">xv. 21</a>); soon, however, returned to the sea of Galilee (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2015:29&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1091675221772040371" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 15:29">v. 29</a>), he takes ship to the eastern side, in the coast of Magdala (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2015:39&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-9086853022233682444" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 15:39">v. 39</a>), but again departs northward into the country of Cæsarea Philippi (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2016:13&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5770141528981697570" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 16:13">xvi. 13</a>), in the vicinity of Lebanon, among the lower ridges of which is to be sought the mount of the transfiguration (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2017:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-47911592167976435" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 17:1">xvii. 1</a>). After journeying in Galilee for some time longer with his disciples (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2017:22&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3413122878572873350" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 17:22">xvii. 22</a>), and once more visiting Capernaum (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2017:24&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-181998842103229077" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 17:24">v. 24</a>), he leaves Galilee (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2019:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5335972965701350660" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 19:1">xix. 1</a>) to travel (as it is most probably explained)<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e14865" id="xd30e14865src">1</a> through Perea into Judea (a journey which, according to <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%209:52&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7376914489065006327" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 9:52">Luke ix. 52</a>, he seems to have made through Samaria); <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2020:17&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2956130324632864622" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 20:17">xx. 17</a>, he is on his way to Jerusalem; <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2020:29&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1459833303797081122" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 20:29">v. 29</a>, he comes through Jericho; and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2021:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-9084680968791500282" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 21:1">xxi. 1</a>, is in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem, which, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2021:10&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5181935759485092667" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 21:10">v. 10</a>, he enters.</p>
				<p>Thus, according to the synoptical writers, Jesus, from his return after being baptized by John, to his final journey to Jerusalem, never goes beyond the limits of North Palestine, but traverses the countries west and east of the Galilean sea and the upper Jordan, in the dominions of Herod Antipas and Philip, without touching on Samaria to the south, still less Judea, or the country under the immediate <span class="corr" id="xd30e14886" title="Source: adminstration">administration</span> of the Romans. And within those limits, to be still more precise, it is the land west of the Jordan, and the sea of Tiberias, and therefore Galilee, the province of Antipas, in which Jesus is especially active; only three short excursions on the eastern border of the sea, and two scarcely longer on the northern frontiers of the country, being recorded.</p>
				<p>Quite otherwise is the theatre of the ministry of Jesus marked out in the fourth gospel. It is true that here also he goes after his baptism by John into Galilee, to the wedding at Cana (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8673427288266637396" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:1">ii. 1</a>), and from thence to Capernaum (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:12&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3026358321610513691" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:12">v. 12</a>); but in a few days the approaching passover calls him to Jerusalem (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:13&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4541934012692087784" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:13">v. 13</a>). From Jerusalem he proceeds into the country of Judea (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%203:22&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3921905916396908267" title="Reference to the Bible: John 3:22">iii. 22</a>), and after some time exercising his ministry there (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%204:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-616051329637135267" title="Reference to the Bible: John 4:1">iv. 1</a>) he returns through Samaria into Galilee (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%204:43&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3497624702172352327" title="Reference to the Bible: John 4:43">v. 43</a>). Nothing is reported of his agency in this province but a single cure, and immediately on this a new feast summons him to Jerusalem (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%205:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4237383232115101440" title="Reference to the Bible: John 5:1">v. 1</a>), where he is represented as performing a cure, being persecuted, and delivering long discourses, until he betakes himself (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6281094956424054985" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:1">vi. 1</a>) to the eastern shore of the sea of Tiberias, and from thence to Capernaum (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:17&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7542309825897365380" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:17">v. 17</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:59&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5803739733440180670" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:59">59</a>). He then itinerates for some time in Galilee (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1369813573183406481" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:1">vii. 1</a>), but again leaves it, on occasion of the feast of tabernacles, for Jerusalem (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:2&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4175947802886845938" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:2">v. 2</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:10&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-93762808302465727" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:10">10</a>). To this visit the Evangelist refers many discourses and vicissitudes of Jesus (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:10&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7594419948512021059" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:10">vii. 10</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2010:21&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3267210880173170085" title="Reference to the Bible: John 10:21">x. 21</a>), and moreover connects with it the commencement of his public ministry at the feast of dedication, without noticing any intermediate journey out of Jerusalem and Judea (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2010:22&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3165887609835462180" title="Reference to the Bible: John 10:22">x. 22</a>). After this Jesus again retires into the country of Perea, where he had first been with the Baptist (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2010:40&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5037216110294829529" title="Reference to the Bible: John 10:40">x. 40</a>), and there remains until the death of Lazarus recalls him to Bethany, near Jerusalem (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2011:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7728674520037151263" title="Reference to the Bible: John 11:1">xi. 1</a>), whence he withdraws to Ephraim, in the vicinity of the wilderness of Judea, until the approach of the passover, which he visited as his last (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2012:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1939681111707490809" title="Reference to the Bible: John 12:1">xii. 1 ff.</a>).</p>
				<p>Thus, according to John, Jesus was present at four feasts in Jerusalem, before the final one: was besides once in Bethany, and had been active for a considerable time in Judea and on his journey through Samaria.</p>
				<p>Why, it must be asked, have the synoptical writers been silent on this frequent presence of Jesus in Judea and Jerusalem? Why have they represented the matter, as if Jesus, before his last fatal journey to Jerusalem, had not overstepped the limits of Galilee and Perea? This discrepancy between the synoptical writers and John was long overlooked in the church, and of late it has been thought feasible to deny its existence. It has been said, that Matthew, at the commencement, lays the scene in Galilee and Capernaum, and pursues his narrative without noticing any journey into Judea until the last; but that we are not hence to conclude that Matthew was unacquainted with the earlier ministry of Jesus in Judea, for as with this Evangelist the local interest is subordinate to the effort at an appropriate arrangement of his events, many particulars in the former part of his history, which he narrates without indicating any place, may have been known, though not stated by him, to have occurred in the earlier journeys and residences in Judea.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e14956" id="xd30e14956src">2</a> But this alleged subordination of the local interest in Matthew, is nothing more than a fiction of the harmonist, as Schneckenburger has recently proved.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e14959" id="xd30e14959src">3</a> Matthew very carefully marks (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%204&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6542164798334994116" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew, chapter 4">chap. iv.</a>) the beginning and (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2019&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3922387008103276317" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew, chapter 19">chap. xix.</a>) the end of the almost exclusive residence of Jesus in Galilee; all the intervening narration must therefore be regarded as belonging to that residence, unless the contrary be expressed; and since the Evangelist is on the alert to notice the short excursions of Jesus across the lake and into the north of Galilee, he would hardly pass over in silence the more important, and sometimes prolonged visits to Judea, had they been known or credited by him. Thus much only is to be allowed, that Matthew frequently neglects the more precise statement of localities, as the designation of the spot or <span class="corr" id="xd30e14969" title="Source: neigbourhood">neighbourhood</span> in which Jesus laboured from time to time: but in his more general biographical statements, such as the designation of the territories and provinces of Palestine, within the boundaries of which Jesus exercised his ministry, he is as accurate as any other Evangelist.</p>
				<p>Expositors must therefore accommodate themselves to the admission of a difference between the synoptical writers and John,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e14974" id="xd30e14974src">4</a> and those who think it incumbent on them to harmonize the Gospels must take care lest this difference be found a contradiction; which can only be prevented by deducing the discrepancy, not from a disparity between the ideas of the Evangelists as to the sphere of the ministry of Jesus, but from the difference of mental bias under which they severally wrote. Some suppose that Matthew, being a Galilean, saw the most interest in Galilean occurrences, and hence confined his narrative to them, though aware of the agency of Jesus at Jerusalem.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e14977" id="xd30e14977src">5</a> But what biographer, who had himself accompanied his hero into various provinces, and beheld his labours there, would confine his narration to what he had performed in his (the biographer’s) native province? Such provincial exclusiveness would surely be quite unexampled. Hence others have preferred the supposition that Matthew, writing at Jerusalem, purposely selected from the mass of discourses and actions of Jesus with which he was acquainted, those of which Galilee was the theatre, because they were the least known at Jerusalem, and required narrating more than what had happened within the hearing, and was fresh in the memories of its inhabitants.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e14980" id="xd30e14980src">6</a> In opposition to this it has been already remarked,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e14983" id="xd30e14983src">7</a> that there is no proof of Matthew’s gospel being especially intended for the Christians of Judea and Jerusalem: that even assuming this, a reference to the events which had happened in the reader’s own country could not be superfluous: and that, lastly, the like limitation of the ministry of Jesus to Galilee by Mark and Luke cannot be thus accounted for, since these Evangelists obviously did not write for Judea (neither were they Galileans, so that this objection is equally valid against the first explanation); and were not in so servile a relation to Matthew as to have no access to independent information that might give them a more extended horizon. It is curious enough that these two attempts to solve the contradiction between the synoptical writers and John, are themselves in the same predicament of mutual contradiction. For if Matthew has been silent on the incidents in Judea, according to one, on account of his proximity, according to the other, on account of his remoteness, it follows that, two contrary hypotheses being made with equal ease to explain the same fact, both are alike inadequate.</p>
				<p>No supposition founded on the local relations of the writers sufficing to explain the difference in question, higher ground must be taken, in a consideration of the spirit and tendency of the evangelical writings. From this point of view the following proposition has been given: The cause which determined the difference in the contents of the fourth gospel and that of the synoptical ones, accounts also for their divergency as to the limits they assign to the ministry of Jesus; in other words, the discourses delivered by Jesus in Jerusalem, and recorded by John, required for their comprehension a more mature development of Christianity than that presented in the first apostolic period; hence they were not retained in the primitive evangelical tradition, of which the synoptical writers were the organs, and were first restored to the church by John, who wrote when Christianity was in a more advanced stage.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e14990" id="xd30e14990src">8</a> But neither is this attempt at an explanation satisfactory, though it is less superficial than the preceding. For how could the popular and the esoteric in the teaching of Jesus be separated with such nicety, that the former should be confined to Galilee, and the latter to Jerusalem (the harsh discourse in the synagogue at Capernaum alone excepted)? It may be said: in Jerusalem he had a more enlightened public around him, and could be more readily understood than in Galilee. But the Galileans could scarcely have misunderstood Jesus more lamentably than did the Jews from first to last, according to John’s representation, and as in Galilee he had the most undisturbed communion with his disciples, we should rather have conjectured that here would be the scene of his more profound instruction. Besides, as the synoptical writers have given a plentiful gleaning of lucid and popular discourses from the final residence of Jesus in Jerusalem, there is no ground whatever for believing that his earlier visits were devoid of such, and that his converse on these occasions took throughout a higher tone. But even allowing that all the earlier discourses of Jesus in Judea and Jerusalem were beyond the range of the first apostolic tradition, <i>deeds</i> were performed there, such as the cure of the man who had had an infirmity thirty-eight years, the conferring of sight on the man born blind, and the raising of Lazarus, which, from their imposing rank among the evidences of Christianity, must also have necessitated the mention of those early visits of Jesus to Judea during which they occurred.</p>
				<p>Thus it is impossible to explain why the synoptical writers, if they knew of the earlier visits of Jesus to Jerusalem, should not have mentioned them, and it must be concluded that if John be right, the first three Evangelists knew nothing of an essential part of the earlier ministry of Jesus; if, on the other hand, the latter be right, the author of the fourth gospel, or of the tradition by which he was guided, fabricated a large portion of what he has narrated concerning the ministry of Jesus, or at least assigned to it a false locality.</p>
				<p>On a closer examination, however, the relation between John and the synoptical writers is not simply such, that the latter might not know what the former records, but such, that they must have proceeded from positively opposite data. For example, the synoptical writers, Matthew especially, as often as Jesus leaves Galilee, from the time that he takes up his abode there after the Baptist’s imprisonment, seldom neglect to give a particular reason; such as that he wished to escape from the crowd by a passage across the sea (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%208:18&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6003258051618883774" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 8:18">Matt. viii. 18</a>), or that he withdrew into the wilderness of Perea to avoid the snares of Herod (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2014:13&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8078274617796906328" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 14:13">xiv. 13</a>), or that he retired into the region of Tyre and Sidon on account of the offence taken by the scribes at his preaching (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2015:21&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8719829954600866663" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 15:21">xv. 21</a>): John, on the contrary, generally alleges a special reason why Jesus leaves Judea, and retires into Galilee. Not to contend that his very first journey thither appears to be occasioned solely by the invitation to Cana, his departure again into Galilee after the first passover attended by him in his public character, is expressly accounted for by the ominous attention which the increasing number of his disciples had excited among the Pharisees (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%204:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8005939455526775549" title="Reference to the Bible: John 4:1">iv. 1 ff.</a>). His retirement after the second feast, also, into the country east of the Sea of Tiberias (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3222610485733090962" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:1">vi. 1</a>), must be viewed in relation to the <span class="trans" title="ezētoun auton hoi Ioudaioi apokteinai"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἐζήτουν αὐτὸν οἱ Ἰουδαῖοι ἀποκτεῖναι</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:18&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3822520177255438687" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:18">v. 18</a>), since immediately after, the Evangelist assigns as a reason for the continuance of Jesus in Galilee, the malignant designs of his enemies, which rendered his abode in Judea perilous to his life (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8244356858773130816" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:1">vii. 1</a>). The interval between the Feast of Tabernacles and the Feast of the Dedication seems to have been spent by Jesus in the capital,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15030" id="xd30e15030src">9</a> no unpropitious circumstances compelling him to absent himself (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2010:22&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5485305083529163308" title="Reference to the Bible: John 10:22">x. 22</a>); on the other hand, his journey into Perea (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2010:40&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-382565689169900184" title="Reference to the Bible: John 10:40">x. 40</a>) and that into Ephraim (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2011:54&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-890817198134189542" title="Reference to the Bible: John 11:54">xi. 54</a>) are presented as effects of his persecution by the Jews.</p>
				<p>Thus precisely the same relation as that which exists between Matthew and Luke, with respect to the original dwelling-place of the parents of Jesus is found between the first three Evangelists and the fourth, with respect to the principal theatre of his ministry. As, in the former instance, Matthew pre-supposes Bethlehem to be the original place of abode, and Nazareth the one subsequently adopted through fortuitous circumstances, while Luke gives the contrary representation; so in the latter, the entire statement of the synoptical writers turns on the idea that, until his last journey, Galilee was the chosen field of the labours of Jesus, and that he only left it occasionally, from particular motives and for a short time; while that of John, on the contrary, turns on the supposition, that Jesus would have taught solely in Judea and Jerusalem had not prudence sometimes counselled him to retire into the more remote provinces.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15048" id="xd30e15048src">10</a></p>
				<p>Of these two representations one only can be true. Before they were perceived to be contradictory, the narrative of John was incorporated with that of the synoptical writers; since they have been allowed to be irreconcilable, the verdict has always been in favour of the fourth Evangelist; and so prevalent is this custom, that even the author of the Probabilia does not use the difference to the disadvantage of the latter. De Wette numbers it among the objections to the authenticity of Matthew’s gospel, that it erroneously limits the ministry of Jesus to Galilee,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15053" id="xd30e15053src">11</a> and Schneckenburger has no more important ground of doubt to produce against the apostolic origin of the first canonical gospel, than the unacquaintance of its author with the extra-Galilean labours of Jesus.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15056" id="xd30e15056src">12</a> If this decision be well founded, it must rest on a careful consideration of the question, which of the two incompatible narratives has the greater corroboration from external sources, and the more internal verisimilitude? We have shown in the introduction that the external evidence or testimony for the authenticity of the fourth gospel and of the synoptical ones, that of Matthew emphatically, is of about equal value: that is, it determines nothing in either case, but leaves the decision to the internal evidence. In relation to this, the following question must be considered: is it more probable that, although Jesus was actually often in Judea and Jerusalem previous to his last journey, yet at the time and place whence the synoptical gospels arose, all traces of the fact had disappeared: or that, on the contrary, although Jesus never entered Judea for the exercise of his public ministry before his last journey thither, yet at the time and place of the composition of the fourth gospel a tradition of several such visits had been formed?</p>
				<p>The above critics seek to show that the first might be the case, in the following manner. The first gospel, they say,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15063" id="xd30e15063src">13</a> and more or less the two middle ones, contain the tradition concerning the life of Jesus as it was formed in Galilee, where the memory of what Jesus did and said in that province would be preserved with a natural partiality—while, of that part of his life which was spent out of Galilee, only the most critical incidents, such as his birth, consecration, and especially his last journey, which issued in his death, would be retained; the remainder, including his early journeys to the various feasts, being either unknown or forgotten, so that any fragments of information concerning one or other of the previous residences of Jesus at Jerusalem would be referred to the last, no other being known.</p>
				<p>But John himself, in whom our theologians rest all their confidence, expressly mentions (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%204:45&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5526224841437240959" title="Reference to the Bible: John 4:45">iv. 45</a>) that at the first passover visited by Jesus after his baptism (and probably at others also) the Galileans were present, and apparently in great numbers, since as a consequence of their having witnessed his works in Jerusalem, Jesus found a favourable reception in Galilee. If we add to this, that most of the disciples who accompanied Jesus in his early journeys to the feasts were Galileans (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%204:22&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7726290913874974210" title="Reference to the Bible: John 4:22">John iv. 22</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%209:2&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7169821749774770390" title="Reference to the Bible: John 9:2">ix. 2</a>), it is inconceivable that tidings of the ministry of Jesus at Jerusalem should not from the first reach Galilee. Once there, could time extinguish them? We grant that it is in the nature of tradition to fuse and remodel its materials, and as the last journey of Jesus to Jerusalem was pre-eminently memorable, it might absorb the recollections of the previous ones. But tradition has also another impulse, and it is its strongest; namely to glorify. It may indeed be said that to circumscribe the early ministry of Jesus by the frontiers of Galilee would serve the purpose of glorifying that province, in which the synoptical tradition had its origin. But the aim of the synoptical legend was not to glorify Galilee, on which it pronounces severe judgments;—Jesus is the object round which it would cast a halo, and his greatness is proportionate to the sphere of his influence. Hence, to show that from the beginning of his ministry he made himself known beyond the Galilean <i xml:lang="la">angulus terræ</i>, and that he often presented himself on the brilliant theatre of the capital, especially on occasions when it was crowded with spectators and hearers from all regions, was entirely according to the bent of the legend. If, therefore, there had historically been but one journey of Jesus to Jerusalem, tradition might be tempted to create more by degrees, since it would argue—how could so great a light as Jesus have remained so long under a bushel, and not rather have early and often placed himself on the lofty stand which Jerusalem presented? Opponents, too, might object, like the unbelieving brethren of Jesus (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:3-4&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1542393790215863734" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:3-4">John vii. 3, 4</a>), that he who is conscious of the power to perform something truly great, does not conceal himself, but seeks publicity, in order that his capabilities may be recognized; and to these opponents it was thought the best answer to show that Jesus actually did seek such publicity, and early obtained recognition in an extended sphere. Out of this representation would easily grow the idea which lies at the foundation of the fourth gospel, that not Galilee, but Judea, was the proper residence of Jesus.</p>
				<p>Thus, viewed from the point of the possible formation of a legend, the balance inclines in favour of the synoptical writers. But is the result the same when we ascend to the relations and designs of Jesus, and from this point of view inquire, if it be more probable that Jesus visited Jerusalem once only or several times during his public life?</p>
				<p>The alleged difficulty, that the various journeys to the feasts offer the principal means of accounting for the intellectual development of Jesus is easily removed<span class="corr" title="Not in source">.</span> For those journeys alone would not suffice to explain the mental pre-eminence of Jesus and as the main stress must still be placed on his internal gifts, we cannot pronounce whether to a mind like his, even Galilee might not present enough aliment for their maturing; besides, an adherence to the synoptical writers would only oblige us to renounce those journeys to the feasts which Jesus took after his public appearance, so that he might still have been present at many feasts previous to his messianic career, without assuming a conspicuous character. It has been held inconceivable that Jesus, so long after his assumption of the messianic character, should confine himself to Galilee, instead of taking his stand in Judea and Jerusalem, which, from the higher culture and more extensive foreign intercourse of their population, were a much more suitable field for his labours; but it has been long remarked, on the other hand, that Jesus could find easier access to the simple and energetic minds of Galilee, less fettered by priestcraft and Pharisaism, and therefore acted judiciously in obtaining a firm footing there by a protracted ministry, before he ventured to Jerusalem, where, in the centre of priestly and Pharisaic domination, he must expect stronger opposition.</p>
				<p>There is a graver difficulty in the synoptical statement, considered in relation to the Mosaic law and Jewish custom. The law rigorously required that every Israelite should appear before Jehovah yearly at the three principal feasts (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Ex%2023:14&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8936915553623813203" title="Reference to the Bible: Exodus 23:14">Exod. xxiii. 14 ff.</a>), and the reverence of Jesus for the Mosaic institutes (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%205:17&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3687959428883090231" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 5:17">Matt. v. 17 ff.</a>) renders it improbable that, during the whole course of his ministry, he should have undertaken but one journey of observance.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15099" id="xd30e15099src">14</a> The Gospel of Matthew, however, be our judgment what it may as to the date and place of its composition, did certainly arise in a community of Jewish Christians, who well knew what the law prescribed to the devout Israelite, and must therefore be aware of the contradiction to the law in which the practice of Jesus was involved, when, during a public ministry of several years’ duration, only one attendance at Jerusalem was noticed, or (in case the synoptical writers supposed but a single year’s ministry, of which we shall speak below) when he was represented as neglecting two of the great annual feasts. If then, a circle in close proximity to Jewish usage found nothing offensive in the opinion that Jesus attended but one feast, may not this authority remove all hesitation on the subject from our minds? Besides, on a more careful weighing of the historical and geographical relations, the question suggests itself, whether between the distant, half Gentile Galilee, and Jerusalem, the ecclesiastical bond was so close that the observance of all the feasts could be expected from a Galilean? Even according to the fourth gospel, Jesus omitted attending one passover that occurred in the period of his public career (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:4&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2144630945507037134" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:4">John vi. 4</a>).</p>
				<p>There is, however, one point unfavourable to the synoptical writers. That Jesus in his last visit to Jerusalem should, within the short space of the feast day, have brought himself into such decided hostility to the ruling party in the capital, that they contrived his arrest and death, is inexplicable, if we reject the statement of John, that this hostility originated and was gradually aggravated during his frequent previous visits.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15109" id="xd30e15109src">15</a> If it be rejoined, that even in Galilean synagogues there were stationary scribes and Pharisees (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%209:3&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-9099879703724216469" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 9:3">Matt ix. 3</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2012:14&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2793739288239380763" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 12:14">xii. 14</a>), that such as were resident in the capital often visited the provinces (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2015:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3445673921527380517" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 15:1">Matt. xv. 1</a>), and that thus there existed a hierarchical nexus by means of which a deadly enmity against Jesus might be propagated in Jerusalem before he had ever publicly appeared there; we then have precisely that ecclesiastical bond between Galilee and Jerusalem which renders improbable on the part of Jesus the non-observance of a series of feasts. Moreover the synoptical writers have recorded an expression of Jesus which tells strongly against their own view. The words: <i>Jerusalem, Jerusalem—how often would I have gathered thy children together—and ye would not</i>, have no meaning whatever in Luke, who puts them into the mouth of Jesus before he had even seen Jerusalem during his public ministry (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%2013:34&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7742268203575386804" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 13:34">xiii. 34</a>); and even from the better arrangement of Matthew (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2023:37&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6869308649412166602" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 23:37">xxiii. 37</a>) it is not to be understood how Jesus, after a single residence of a few days in Jerusalem, could found his reproaches on multiplied efforts to win over its inhabitants to his cause. This whole apostrophe of Jesus has so original a character, that it is difficult to believe it incorrectly assigned to him; hence to explain its existence, we must suppose a series of earlier residences in Jerusalem, such as those recorded by the fourth Evangelist. There is only one resource,—to pronounce the statement of the synoptical writers unhistorical in the particular of limiting the decisive visit of Jesus to Jerusalem to the few days of the feast, and to suppose that he made a more protracted stay in the capital.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15130" id="xd30e15130src">16</a></p>
				<p>It will be seen from the foregoing discussion, whether, when so much is to be argued <i>pro</i> and <i>contra</i>, the unhesitating decision of the critics in favour of the fourth Evangelist’s statement is a just one. For our own part, we are far from being equally hasty in declaring for the synoptical writers, and are content to have submitted the actual state of the controversy, as to the comparative merits of John and the synoptical writers, to further consideration.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="subchapter-58" epub:type="subchapter">
				<header>
					<p>§ 58</p>
					<p>THE RESIDENCE OF JESUS AT CAPERNAUM.</p>
				</header>
				<p>During the time spent by Jesus in Judea, the capital and its environs recommended themselves as the most eligible theatre for his agency; and we might have conjectured that in like manner, when in Galilee, he would have chosen his native city, Nazareth, as the centre of his labours. Instead of this we find him, when not travelling, domesticated at Capernaum, as already mentioned; the synoptical writers designate this place the <span class="trans" title="idia polis"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἰδία πόλις</span></span> of Jesus (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%209:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1793504744193750646" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 9:1">Matt. ix. 1</a>, comp. <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mk%202:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1358785110442745066" title="Reference to the Bible: Mark 2:1">Mark ii. 1</a>); here, according to them, was the <span class="trans" title="oikos"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">οἴκος</span></span>, which Jesus was accustomed to inhabit (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mk%202:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4496527888283011561" title="Reference to the Bible: Mark 2:1">Mark ii. 1</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mk%203:20&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7017069887539489908" title="Reference to the Bible: Mark 3:20">iii. 20</a>; <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2013:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6124476181515863284" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 13:1">Matt. xiii. 1</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2013:36&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4214441912006570444" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 13:36">36</a>) probably that of Peter (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mk%201:29&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-9000474689454330056" title="Reference to the Bible: Mark 1:29">Mark i. 29</a>; <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%208:14&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2494561884616329166" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 8:14">Matt. viii. 14</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2017:25&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4367317429530405095" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 17:25">xvii. 25</a>; <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%204:38&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2063297135355444720" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 4:38">Luke iv. 38</a>). In the fourth gospel, which only mentions very transient visits of Jesus to Galilee, Capernaum is not given as his dwelling-place, and Cana is the place with which he is supposed to have the most connexion. After his baptism he proceeds first to Cana (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2060469998479027146" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:1">ii. 1</a>), on a special occasion, it is true; after this he makes a short stay at Capernaum (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:12&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6913398046132590657" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:12">v. 12</a>); and on his return from his first attendance at the passover, it is again Cana to which he resorts and in which the fourth Evangelist makes him effect a cure (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%204:46&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8065562334841948188" title="Reference to the Bible: John 4:46">iv. 46 ff.</a>), according to the synoptical writers, performed at Capernaum, and after this we find him once again in the synagogue at Capernaum (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:59&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-844855329323385" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:59">vi. 59</a>). The most eminent disciples, also, are said by the writer of the fourth gospel, not as by the synoptical writers, to come from Capernaum, but partly from Cana (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2021:2&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2615604227094975903" title="Reference to the Bible: John 21:2">xxi. 2</a>) and partly from Bethsaida (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%201:45&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1120133404231091141" title="Reference to the Bible: John 1:45">i. 45</a>). The latter place, even in the synoptical gospels, is mentioned, with Chorazin, as one in which Jesus had been pre-eminently active (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2011:21&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1272391150756647202" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 11:21">Matt. xi. 21</a>; <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%2010:13&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-9172521242644082617" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 10:13">Luke x. 13</a>).</p>
				<p>Why Jesus chose Capernaum as his central residence in Galilee, Mark does not attempt to show, but conducts him thither without comment after his return into Galilee, and the calling of the two pairs of fishermen (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mk%201:21&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7642793944458583605" title="Reference to the Bible: Mark 1:21">i. 21</a>). Matthew (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%204:13&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3929495608802324616" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 4:13">iv. 13 ff.</a>) alleges as a motive, that an Old Testament prophecy (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Is%208:23&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7331833611797186112" title="Reference to the Bible: Isaiah 8:23">Isa. viii. 23</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Is%209:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2514312987068031652" title="Reference to the Bible: Isaiah 9:1">ix. 1</a>), was thereby fulfilled; a dogmatical motive, and therefore of no historical value. Luke thinks he has found the reason in a fact, which is more worthy of notice. According to him, Jesus after his return from baptism does not immediately take up his residence in Capernaum, but makes an essay to teach in Nazareth, and after its failure first turns to Capernaum. This Evangelist tells us in the most graphic style how Jesus presented himself at the synagogue on the sabbath-day, and expounded a prophetic passage, so as to excite general admiration, but at the same time to provoke malicious reflections on the narrow circumstances of his family. Jesus, in reply, is made to refer the discontent of the Nazarenes, that he performed no miracles before them as at Capernaum, to the contempt which every prophet meets with in his own country, and to threaten them in Old Testament allusions, that the divine benefits would be withdrawn from them and conferred on strangers. Exasperated by this, they lead him to the brow of the hill, intending to cast him down; he, however, passes unhurt through the midst of them (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%204:16-30&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7545660414348195207" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 4:16-30">iv. 16–30</a>).</p>
				<p>Both the other synoptical writers are acquainted with a visit of Jesus to Nazareth; but they transfer it to a much later period, when Jesus had been long labouring in Galilee, and resident in Capernaum (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2013:54&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6794051985331020342" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 13:54">Matt. xiii. 54 ff.</a>; <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mk%206:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2582254159852816627" title="Reference to the Bible: Mark 6:1">Mark vi. 1 ff.</a>). To reconcile their narrative with that of Luke, it has been customary to suppose that Jesus, notwithstanding his first rough reception, as described by Luke, wished to make one more experiment whether his long absence and subsequent fame might not have altered the opinion of the Nazarenes—an opinion worthy of a petty town: but the result was equally unfavourable.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15244" id="xd30e15244src">17</a> The two scenes, however, are too similar to be prevented from mingling with each other. In both instances the teaching of Jesus in the synagogue makes the same impression on the Nazarenes,—that of amazement at the wisdom of the carpenter’s son (Luke only giving more details): in both instances there is a lack of miracles on the part of Jesus, the first two Evangelists presenting more prominently its cause, namely, the unbelief of the Nazarenes, and the third dwelling more on its unfavourable effect: lastly in both instances, Jesus delivers the maxim (the result of his experience), that a prophet is the least esteemed in his own country: and to this Luke appends a more ample discourse, which irritates the Nazarenes to attempt an act of violence, unnoticed by the other Evangelists. But the fact which most decisively shows that the two narratives cannot exist in each other’s presence, is that they both claim to relate the first incident of the kind;<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15249" id="xd30e15249src">18</a> for in both, the Nazarenes express their astonishment at the suddenly revealed intellectual gifts of Jesus, which they could not at once reconcile with his known condition.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15253" id="xd30e15253src">19</a> The first supposition that presents itself is, that the scene described by Luke preceded that of Matthew and Mark; but if so, the Nazarenes could not wonder a second time and inquire, <i>whence hath this man this wisdom?</i> since they must have had proof on that point on the first occasion; if, on the contrary, we try to give the later date to Luke’s incident, it appears unnatural, for the same reason that they should wonder at <i>the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth</i>, neither could Jesus well say, <i>This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears</i>, without severely reflecting on their former insensibility, which had retarded that fulfilment.</p>
				<p>These considerations have led the majority of modern commentators to the opinion, that Luke and the other synoptical Evangelists have here given the same history, merely differing in the date, and in the colouring of the facts;<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15264" id="xd30e15264src">20</a> and the only question among them is, which of the two narrations deserves the preference. With respect to the date, that of Luke seems, at the first glance, to have the advantage; it gives the desiderated motive for the change of residence, and the wonder of the Nazarenes appears most natural on the supposition that then he first assumed the function of a public teacher; hence Matthew’s divergency from Luke has been recently made a serious reproach to him, as a chronological error.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15267" id="xd30e15267src">21</a> But there is one particular in all the three narratives which is an obstacle to our referring the incident to so early a period. If Jesus presented himself thus at Nazareth before he had made Capernaum the principal theatre of his agency, the Nazarenes could not utter the words which Jesus imputes to them in Luke: <i>Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country</i>; nor could they, according to Matthew and Mark, be astonished at the <i>mighty works</i> of Jesus,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15274" id="xd30e15274src">22</a> for as he performed few if any miracles at Nazareth, that expression, notwithstanding its perplexing connexion with the <span class="trans" title="sophia"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">σοφία</span></span>, <i>the wisdom</i>, manifested in that city, must refer to works performed elsewhere. If, then, the Nazarenes wondered at the deeds of Jesus at Capernaum, or were jealous of the distinction conferred on that city, Jesus must have previously resided there, and could not have proceeded thither for the first time in consequence of the scene at Nazareth. From this, it is plain that the later chronological position of the narrative is the original one, and that Luke, in placing it earlier, out of mere conjecture, was honest or careless enough to retain the mention of the wonders at Capernaum, though only consistent with the later position.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15290" id="xd30e15290src">23</a> If, with regard to the date of the incident, the advantage is thus on the side of Matthew and Mark, we are left in darkness as to the motive which led Jesus to alter his abode from Nazareth to Capernaum; unless the circumstance that some of his most confidential disciples had their home there, and the more extensive traffic of the place, may be regarded as inducements to the measure.</p>
				<p>The fulness and particularity of Luke’s description of the scene, contrasted with the summary style in which it is given by the other two Evangelists, has generally won for the former the praise of superior accuracy.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15297" id="xd30e15297src">24</a> Let us look more closely, and we shall find that the greater particularity of Luke shows itself chiefly in this, that he is not satisfied with a merely general mention of the discourse delivered by Jesus in the synagogue, but cites the Old Testament passage on which he enlarged, and the commencement of its application. The passage is from <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Is%2061:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-282845971931055984" title="Reference to the Bible: Isaiah 61:1">Isa. lxi. 1</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Is%2061:2&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2375596741292105556" title="Reference to the Bible: Isaiah 61:2">2</a>, where the prophet announces the return from exile, with the exception of the words <i>to set at liberty them that are bruised</i>, <span class="trans" title="aposteilai tethrausmenous en aphesei"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἀποστεῖλαι τεθραυσμένους ἐν ἀφέσει</span></span>, which are from <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Is%2058:6&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-744985598951192582" title="Reference to the Bible: Isaiah 58:6">Isa. lviii. 6</a>. To this passage Jesus gives a messianic interpretation, for he declares it to be fulfilled by his appearance. Why he selected this text from among all others has been variously conjectured. It is known that among the Jews at a later period, certain extracts from the Thorah and the Prophets were statedly read on particular sabbaths and feast days, and it has hence been suggested that the above passage was the selection appointed for the occasion in question. It is true that the chapter from which the words <span class="trans" title="aposteilai k.t.l."><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἀποστεῖλαι κ.τ.λ.</span></span> are taken, used to be read on the great Day of Atonement, and Bengel has made the supposition, that the scene we are considering occurred on that day, a main pillar of his evangelical chronology.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15328" id="xd30e15328src">25</a> But if Jesus had adhered to the regular course of reading, he would not merely have extracted from the lesson appointed for this feast a few stray words, to insert them in a totally disconnected passage; and after all, it is impossible to demonstrate that, so early as the time of Jesus, there were prescribed readings, even from the prophets.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15331" id="xd30e15331src">26</a> If then Jesus was not thus circumstantially directed to the passage cited, did he open upon it designedly or fortuitously? Many imagine him turning over the leaves until he found the text which was in his mind:<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15334" id="xd30e15334src">27</a> but Olshausen is right in saying that the words <span class="trans" title="anaptyxas to biblion heure ton topon"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἀναπτύξας τὸ βιβλίον εὗρε τὸν τόπον</span></span> do not imply that he found the passage after searching for it, but that he alighted on it under the guidance of the Divine Spirit.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15346" id="xd30e15346src">28</a> This, however, is but a poor contrivance, to hide the improbability, that Jesus should fortuitously open on a passage so well adapted to serve as a motto for his first messianic enterprize, behind an appeal to the Spirit, as <i xml:lang="la">deus ex machinâ</i>. Jesus might very likely have quoted this text with reference to himself, and thus it would remain in the minds of the Evangelists as a prophecy fulfilled in Jesus; Matthew would probably have introduced it in his own person with his usual form, <span class="trans" title="hina plērōthē"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἵνα πληρωθῇ</span></span>, and would have said that Jesus had now begun his messianic annunciation, <span class="trans" title="kērygma"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">κήρυγμα</span></span>, that the prophecy <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Is%2061:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-86553565771173809" title="Reference to the Bible: Isaiah 61:1">Isa. lxi. 1 ff.</a> might be fulfilled; but Luke, who is less partial to this form, or the tradition whence he drew his materials, puts the words into the mouth of Jesus on his first messianic appearance, very judiciously, it is true, but, owing to the chances which it is necessary to suppose, less probably; so that I am more inclined to be satisfied with the indefinite statement of Matthew and Mark. The other point in which the description of Luke merits the praise of particularity, is his dramatic picture of the tumultuary closing scene; but this scene perplexes even those who on the whole give the preference to his narrative. It is not to be concealed that the extremely violent expulsion of Jesus by the Nazarenes, seems to have had no adequate provocation:<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15372" id="xd30e15372src">29</a> and we cannot with Schleiermacher,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15375" id="xd30e15375src">30</a> expunge the notion that the life of Jesus was threatened, without imputing to the writer a false addition of the words <span class="trans" title="eis to katakrēmnisai auton"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">εἰς τὸ κατακρημνίσαι αὐτὸν</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%204:29&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-732837115859106982" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 4:29">v. 29</a>), and thus materially affecting the credibility of his entire narration. But the still more remarkable clause, <span class="trans" title="dielthōn dia mesou autōn eporeueto"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">διελθὼν διὰ μέσου αὐτῶν ἐπορεύετο</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%204:30&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5062004252929754729" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 4:30">v. 30</a>), is the main difficulty. It is not to be explained (at least not in accordance with the Evangelist’s view) as an effect merely of the commanding glance of Jesus, as Hase supposes; and Olshausen is again right when he says, that the Evangelist intended to signify that Jesus passed unharmed through the midst of his furious enemies, because his divine power fettered their senses and limbs, because his hour was not yet come (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%208:20&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-726512290213481518" title="Reference to the Bible: John 8:20">John viii. 20</a>), and because no man could take his life from him until he himself laid it down (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2010:18&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8549759896013495249" title="Reference to the Bible: John 10:18">John x. 18</a>).<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15409" id="xd30e15409src">31</a> Here again we have a display of the glorifying tendency of tradition, which loved to represent Jesus as one defended from his enemies, like Lot (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Gn%2019:11&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7869253322421681448" title="Reference to the Bible: Genesis 19:11">Gen. xix. 11</a>), or Elisha (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=2%20Kgs%206:18&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1290132826315086533" title="Reference to the Bible: 2 Kings 6:18">2 Kings vi. 18</a>), by a heavenly hand, or better still, by the power of his own superior nature; unless there be supposed in this case, as in the two examples from the Old Testament, a temporary infliction of blindness, an <i xml:lang="la">illudere per caliginem</i>, the idea of which Tertullian reprobates.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15422" id="xd30e15422src">32</a> Thus in this instance also, the less imposing account of the first two Evangelists is to be preferred, namely that Jesus, impeded from further activity by the unbelief of the Nazarenes, voluntarily forsook his ungrateful paternal city.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="subchapter-59" epub:type="subchapter">
				<header>
					<p>§ 59</p>
					<p>DIVERGENCIES OF THE EVANGELISTS AS TO THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE LIFE OF JESUS. DURATION OF HIS PUBLIC MINISTRY.</p>
				</header>
				<p>In considering the chronology of the public life of Jesus, we must distinguish the question of its total duration, from that of the arrangement of its particular events.</p>
				<p>Not one of our Evangelists expressly tells us how long the public ministry of Jesus lasted; but while the synoptical writers give us no clue to a decision on the subject, we find in John certain data, which seem to warrant one. In the synoptical gospels there is no intimation how long after the baptism of Jesus his imprisonment and death occurred: nowhere are months and years distinguished; and though it is once or twice said: <span class="trans" title="meth’ hēmeras hex"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">μεθ’ ἡμέρας ἓξ</span></span> or <span class="trans" title="dyo"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">δύο</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2017:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-989752223040220593" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 17:1">Matt. xvii. 1</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2026:2&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8594005582991204725" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 26:2">2</a>), these isolated fixed points furnish us with no guidance in a sea of general uncertainty. On the contrary, the many journeys to the feasts by which the narrative of the fourth Evangelist is distinguished from that of his predecessors, furnishes us, so to speak, with chronological abutments, as for each appearance of Jesus at one of these annual feasts, the Passover especially, we must, deducting the first, reckon a full year of his ministry. We have, in the fourth gospel, after the baptism of Jesus, and apparently at a short interval (comp. <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%201:29&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-898676845542164919" title="Reference to the Bible: John 1:29">i. 29</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%201:35&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8490733442886515310" title="Reference to the Bible: John 1:35">35</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%201:44&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1545383338676007772" title="Reference to the Bible: John 1:44">44</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-195596484453495003" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:1">ii. 1</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:12&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7804617077652305365" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:12">12</a>), a passover attended by him (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:13&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5184529345123721213" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:13">ii. 13</a>). But the next feast visited by Jesus (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%205:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2893501927570022743" title="Reference to the Bible: John 5:1">v. 1</a>) which is indefinitely designated <i>a feast of the Jews</i>, has been the perpetual <i>crux</i> of New Testament chronologists. It is only important in determining the duration of the public life of Jesus, on the supposition that it was a passover; for in this case it would mark the close of his first year’s ministry. We grant that <span class="trans" title="hē heortē tōn Ioudaiōn"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἡ ἑορτὴ τῶν Ἰουδαίων</span></span>, <span class="sc">THE</span> <i>feast of the Jews</i>, might very probably denote the Passover, which was pre-eminent among their institutions:<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15494" id="xd30e15494src">33</a> but it happens that the best manuscripts have in the present passage no article, and without it, the above expression can only signify indefinitely one of the Jewish feasts, which the author thought it immaterial to specify.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15500" id="xd30e15500src">34</a> Thus intrinsically it might mean either the feast of Pentecost,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15503" id="xd30e15503src">35</a> Purim,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15506" id="xd30e15506src">36</a> the Passover,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15509" id="xd30e15509src">37</a> or any other;<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15512" id="xd30e15512src">38</a> but in its actual connection it is evidently not intended by the narrator to imply the Passover, both because he would hardly have glanced thus slightly at the most important of all the feasts, and because, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:4&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3778147914545008707" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:4">vi. 4</a>, there comes another Passover, so that on the supposition we are contesting, he would have passed in silence over a whole year between <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%205:47&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2517378343657146667" title="Reference to the Bible: John 5:47">v. 47</a>, and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-9029447946896858255" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:1">vi. 1</a>. For to give the words, <span class="trans" title="ēn de engys to pascha"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἦν δὲ ἐγγὺς τὸ πάσχα</span></span> (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:4&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-694301200095883320" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:4">vi. 4</a>), a retrospective meaning, is too artificial an expedient of Paulus, since, as he himself confesses,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15536" id="xd30e15536src">39</a> this phrase, elsewhere in John, is invariably used with reference to the immediately approaching feast (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%202:13&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-911487594643992324" title="Reference to the Bible: John 2:13">ii. 13</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:2&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8609002857925119771" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:2">vii. 2</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2011:55&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-4099088341168271736" title="Reference to the Bible: John 11:55">xi. 55</a>), and must from its nature have a prospective meaning, unless the context indicate the contrary. Thus not until <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:4&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7040358833259143086" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:4">John vi. 4</a>, do we meet with the second passover, and to this it is not mentioned that Jesus resorted.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15552" id="xd30e15552src">40</a> Then follow the feast of Tabernacles and that of the Dedication, and afterwards, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2011:55&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1729146530928825801" title="Reference to the Bible: John 11:55">xi. 55</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%2012:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7915200357089909183" title="Reference to the Bible: John 12:1">xii. 1</a>, the last passover visited by Jesus. According to our view of <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%205:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3807548494064108646" title="Reference to the Bible: John 5:1">John v. 1</a>, and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:4&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7685462933871407133" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:4">vi. 4</a>, therefore, we obtain two years for the public ministry of Jesus, besides the interval between his baptism and the first Passover<span class="corr" title="Source: ,">.</span> The same result is found by those who, with Paulus, hold the feast mentioned, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%205:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8900746865830883241" title="Reference to the Bible: John 5:1">v. 1</a>, to be a passover, but <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:4&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5689254189646765845" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:4">vi. 4</a>, only a retrospective allusion; whereas the ancient Fathers of the Church, reckoning a separate Passover to each of the passages in question, made out three years. Meanwhile, by this calculation, we only get the minimum duration of the public ministry of Jesus possible according to the fourth gospel, for the writer nowhere intimates that he has been punctilious in naming every feast that fell within that ministry, including those not observed by Jesus, neither, unless we regard it as established that the writer was the apostle John, have we any guarantee that he knew the entire number.</p>
				<p>It may be urged in opposition to the calculations, built on the representations of John, that the synoptical writers give no reasons for limiting the term of the public ministry of Jesus to a single year:<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15579" id="xd30e15579src">41</a> but this objection rests on a supposition borrowed from John himself, namely that Jesus, Galilean though he was, made it a rule to attend every Passover: a supposition, again, which is overturned by the same writer’s own representation. According to him, Jesus left unobserved the passover mentioned, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:4&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6720314401712120306" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:4">vi. 4</a>, for from <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-736582972123599244" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:1">vi. 1</a>, where Jesus is on the east side of the sea of Tiberias, through <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:17&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7624953531215932974" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:17">vi. 17</a> and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:59&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-9101237351059892308" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:59">59</a>, where he goes to Capernaum, and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-6946159668599280747" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:1">vii. 1</a>, where he frequents Galilee, in order to avoid the Jews, to <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:2&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-3431396665761180116" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:2">vii. 2</a> and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%207:10&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8920057583455525656" title="Reference to the Bible: John 7:10">10</a>, where he proceeds to Jerusalem on occasion of the feast of Tabernacles, the Evangelist’s narrative is so closely consecutive that a journey to the Passover can nowhere be inserted. Out of the synoptical gospels, by themselves, we gather nothing as to the length of the public ministry of Jesus, for this representation admits of our assigning him either several years of activity, or only one; their restriction of his intercourse with Jerusalem to his final journey being the sole point in which they control our conclusion. It is true that several Fathers of the Church,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15606" id="xd30e15606src">42</a> as well as some heretics,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15609" id="xd30e15609src">43</a> speak of the ministry of Jesus as having lasted but a single year; but that the source of this opinion was not the absence of early journeys to the feasts in the synoptical gospels, but an entirely fortuitous association, we learn from those Fathers themselves, for they derive it from the prophetic passage <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Is%2061:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8402326620554630505" title="Reference to the Bible: Isaiah 61:1">Isa. lxi. 1 f.</a> applied by Jesus (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%204&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7807337746884930968" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke, chapter 4">Luke iv.</a>) to himself. In this passage there is mention of <i>the acceptable year of the Lord</i>, <span class="trans" title="eniautos Kyriou dektos"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἐνιαυτὸς Κυρίου δεκτὸς</span></span>, which the prophet or, according to the Evangelical interpretation, the Messiah is sent to announce. Understanding this phrase in its strict chronological sense, they adopted from it the notion of a single messianic year, which was more easily reconcilable with the synoptical gospels than with that of John, after whose statement the calculation of the church soon came to be regulated.</p>
				<p>In striking contrast with this lowest computation of time, is the tradition, also very ancient, that Jesus was baptized in his thirtieth year, but at the time of his crucifixion was not far from his fiftieth.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15631" id="xd30e15631src">44</a> But this opinion is equally founded on a misunderstanding. <i>The elders who had conversations with John the disciple of the Lord, in Asia</i>, <span class="trans" title="presbyteroi hoi kata tēn Asian Iōannē tō tou Kyriou mathētē symbeblēkotes"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">πρεσβύτεροι οἱ κατὰ τὴν Ἀσίαν Ἰωάννῃ τῷ τοῦ Κυρίου μαθητῇ συμβεβληκότες</span></span>,—on whose testimony Irenæus relies when he says, <i>such is the tradition of John</i>, <span class="trans" title="paradedōkenai tauta ton Iōannēn"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">παραδεδωκέναι ταῦτα τὸν Ἰωάννην</span></span>,—had given no information further than that Christ taught, <i xml:lang="la">ætatem seniorem habens</i>. That this <i xml:lang="la">ætas senior</i> was the age of from forty to fifty years is merely the inference of Irenæus, founded on what the Jews allege as an objection to the discourse of Jesus, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%208:57&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2437145961068383879" title="Reference to the Bible: John 8:57">John viii. 57</a>: <i>Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?</i> language which according to Irenæus could only be addressed to one, <i xml:lang="la">qui jam quadraginta annos excessit, quinquagesimum autem annum nondum attigit</i>. But the Jews might very well say to a man a little more than thirty, that he was much too young to have seen Abraham, since he had not reached his fiftieth year, which, in the Jewish idea, completed the term of manhood.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15671" id="xd30e15671src">45</a></p>
				<p>Thus we can obtain no precise information from our gospels as to how long the public labours of Jesus lasted; all we can gather is, that if we follow the fourth gospel we must not reckon less than two years and something over. But the repeated journeys to the feasts on which this calculation is founded are themselves not established beyond doubt.</p>
				<p>Opposed to this minimum, we gain a maximum, if we understand, from <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%203:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8486824776179067957" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 3:1">Luke iii. 1 ff.</a> and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%203:23&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2411512566313620523" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 3:23">23</a>, that the baptism of Jesus took place in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, and add to this that his crucifixion occurred under the procuratorship of Pontius Pilate. For as Pilate was recalled from his post in the year of Tiberius’s death,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15683" id="xd30e15683src">46</a> and as Tiberius reigned rather more than seven years after the fifteenth year of his reign,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15686" id="xd30e15686src">47</a> it follows that seven years are the maximum of the possible duration of the ministry of Jesus after his baptism. But while one of these data, namely, that Jesus was crucified under Pilate, is well attested, the other is rendered suspicious by its association with a chronological error, so that in fact we cannot achieve here even a proximate, still less an accurate solution of our question.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="subchapter-60" epub:type="subchapter">
				<header>
					<p>§ 60</p>
					<p>THE ATTEMPTS AT A <span class="corr" id="xd30e15696" title="Source: CHRONOLOGIGAL">CHRONOLOGICAL</span> ARRANGEMENT OF THE PARTICULAR EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC LIFE OF JESUS.</p>
				</header>
				<p>In attempting a chronological arrangement of the particular events occurring in the interval between the baptism of Jesus and his crucifixion, the peculiar relation of the synoptical writers to John, renders it necessary to give them both a separate and a comparative examination. As to the latter, if its result be a reconciliation of the two accounts, the journeys to the feasts in John must form the panels between which the materials of the synoptical writers must be so inserted, that between each pair of journeys with the incidents at Jerusalem to which they gave rise, would fall a portion of the Galilean history. For this incorporation to be effected with any certainty, two things would be essential; first, a notice of the departure of Jesus from Galilee by the first three Evangelists, as often as the fourth speaks of a residence in Jerusalem; and, secondly, on the part of John, an intimation, if not a narration, between his accounts of the several feasts, of the Galilean occurrences represented by the synoptical writers as an uninterrupted train. But we have seen that the synoptical writers fail in the required notice; while it is notorious that John, from the baptism of Jesus to the closing scenes of his life, is only in two or three instances in coincidence with the other Evangelists. John says (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%203:24&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-5759585195821830167" title="Reference to the Bible: John 3:24">iii. 24</a>) that when Jesus began his ministry, <i>John was not yet cast into prison</i>; Matthew makes the return of Jesus into Galilee subsequent to the imprisonment of the Baptist (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%204:12&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-1586383651456821147" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 4:12">iv. 12</a>), hence it has been inferred that that return was from the first passover, and not from the baptism;<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15709" id="xd30e15709src">48</a> but it is undeniable that Matthew places the commencement of the public ministry of Jesus in Galilee, and presupposes no earlier ministry at the feast in Jerusalem, so that the two statements, instead of dovetailing, as has been imagined, are altogether incompatible. The next, but very dubious point of contact, occurs in the healing of the nobleman’s son, according to <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%204:46&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-955708449262653909" title="Reference to the Bible: John 4:46">John iv. 46 ff.</a>, or the centurion’s servant, according to <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%208:5&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-984085124863685806" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 8:5">Matt. viii. 5 ff.</a>, and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Lk%207:1&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-2457134613375707098" title="Reference to the Bible: Luke 7:1">Luke vii. 1 ff.</a>, which John places (<a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%204:47&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-572384242994541851" title="Reference to the Bible: John 4:47">v. 47</a>) immediately after the return of Jesus from his prolonged residence in Judea and Samaria, during and after the first passover. It was to be expected, then, that the corresponding narration of the synoptical writers would be preceded by some intimation of the first journey made by Jesus to a feast. Not only is such an intimation wanting—there is not a single aperture to be found for the insertion of this journey, since, according to the synoptical writers, the cure in question was an immediate sequel to the Sermon on the Mount, which Matthew and Luke represent as the culminating point, of an apparently uninterrupted course of teaching and miracles in Galilee. Thus neither at this point is the chronology of the first three Evangelists to be eked out by that of the fourth, since they nowhere present a joint on to which the statements of the latter can be articulated. Another more decided coincidence between the two parties exists in the associated narratives of the miracle of the loaves, and that of walking on the sea, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Jn%206:1-21&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8000285435187425649" title="Reference to the Bible: John 6:1-21">John vi. 1–21</a>, <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%2014:14-36&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-8504079215724820003" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 14:14-36">Matt. xiv. 14–36</a> parall., which John places in the interval immediately preceding the second passover, unvisited by Jesus; but he differs so completely from the synoptical writers in his account of these miracles, both in their introduction and termination, that either he or they must inevitably be wrong. For while, according to Matthew, Jesus retires from Nazareth probably, at all events from some part of Galilee, to the opposite side of the sea, where he effects the multiplication of the loaves; according to John he sets out from Jerusalem. Further, in the first two gospels Jesus proceeds after the miracle of the loaves into a district where he was less known (both <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mt%205:35&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-293099879983491742" title="Reference to the Bible: Matthew 5:35">Matt. v. 35</a> and <a class="biblink xd30e44" href="https://classic.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mk%205:54&amp;version=NRSV" id="id-7280499349579669056" title="Reference to the Bible: Mark 5:54">Mark v. 54</a> expressly stating that the people knew him), whereas in John he goes directly to Capernaum, with which of all places he was the most familiar. We know not here whether to tax the synoptical writers or John with a mistake: and as we cannot pronounce whether he or they have placed this incident too early or too late, we are equally ignorant how much of the synoptical narratives we are to place before, and how much after, the second passover, which John makes nearly cotemporary with the feeding of the five thousand. Here, however, the points of contact between this Evangelist and his predecessors are at an end, until we come to the last journey of Jesus; and if they are too uncertain to promise even a simple division of the synoptical materials by the two Passovers, how can we hope, by the journeys of Jesus to the <i>feast of the Jews</i>, <span class="trans" title="heortē tōn Ioudaiōn"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">ἑορτὴ τῶν Ἰουδαίων</span></span>, to the feast of Tabernacles, or to the feast of Dedication, if that be a separate journey, to classify chronologically the uninterrupted series of Galilean occurrences in the first three gospels? Nevertheless this has been attempted by a succession of theologians down to the present time, with an expenditure of acumen and erudition, worthy of a more fertile subject;<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15750" id="xd30e15750src">49</a> but unprejudiced judges have decided, that as the narrative of the first three Evangelists has scarcely any elements that can give certitude to such a classification, not one of the harmonies of the gospels yet written has any claim to be considered anything more than a tissue of historical conjectures.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15758" id="xd30e15758src">50</a></p>
				<p>It remains to estimate the chronological value of the synoptical writers, apart from John. They are so frequently at variance with each other in the order of events, and it is so seldom that one has all the probabilities on his side, that each of them may be convicted of numerous chronological errors, which must undermine our confidence in his accuracy. It has been maintained that, in the composition of their books, they meditated no precise chronological order,<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15765" id="xd30e15765src">51</a> and this is partially confirmed by their mode of narration. Throughout the interval between the baptism of Jesus and the history of the Passion, their narratives resemble a collection of anecdotes, strung together mostly on a thread of mere analogy and association of ideas. But there is a distinction to be made in reference to the above opinion. It is true that from the purport of their narratives, and the indecisiveness and uniformity of their connecting phrases, <i>we</i> can detect their want of insight into the more accurate chronological relations of what they record; but that <i>the authors</i> flattered themselves they were giving a chronological narration, is evident from those very connecting phrases, which, however indecisive, have almost always a chronological character, such as <span class="trans" title="katabanti apo tou orous, paragōn ekeithen, tauta autou lalountos, en autē tē hēmera, tote, kai idou"><span class="grek" xml:lang="grc">καταβάντι ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄρους, παράγων ἐκεῖθεν, ταῦτα αὐτοῦ λαλοῦντος, ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ ἡμέρᾳ, τότε, καὶ ἰδοὺ</span></span>, etc.<a class="noteRef pginternal" href="#xd30e15780" id="xd30e15780src">52</a></p>
				<p>The incidents and discourses detailed by John are, for the most part, peculiar to himself; he is therefore not liable to the same control in his chronology from independent authors, as are the synoptical writers from each other; neither is his narration wanting in connectedness and sequence. Hence our decision on the merits of his chronological order is dependent on the answer to the following question: Is the development and progress of the cause and plan of Jesus, as given by the fourth Evangelist, credible in itself and on comparison with available data, drawn from the other gospels? The solution to this question is involved in the succeeding inquiry.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
